Oxford Bookworms Stage 1, published by FLTRP Copyright Oxford University
Press 2009
Mary Queen of Scots, by Tim Vickery, read by Claire
Willy
Chapter 1, Fothering Gay My name is Bess Curl, but
this is not my story.
It is the story of my Lady Mary, Queen of
Scots. She wrote the story, and then she gave
it to me. I am going to give it to
her son. She began the story a week ago. It
was January
1587, and we sat here in our cold room, in
Fothering Gay Castle, in the north of England.
We couldn't see much from the window. One or two
houses, a river, some trees, some horses,
and a road. That's all. The road goes to London,
the home of Queen Elizabeth of England.
Mary sat with her little dog in her hands, and
watched it all day long. No one came along the
road. Nothing happened. I watched Mary unhappily. Please your majesty,
come away from that window,
I said. It doesn't help. No one is going to
come. Queen Elizabeth can't do it. Queens don't
kill queens. Don't they, Bess? Mary said, then why are
we here in this prison? Why am I not free?
Why, your majesty? Because Queen Elizabeth is afraid of you.
That's right, Mary said. She's afraid of me, and she
hates me too. She hates me because I am
afraid of you. And because many people, good Catholic people
in England, France, Scotland,
Spain, say that I, Mary, and the true queen of
England, not Elizabeth. And Elizabeth has
no children, so when she is dead, my son, James,
she came away from the window and stood
in front of me. James, she said quietly, my son,
does he think about me sometimes? He
was only ten months old when I last saw him.
It is nearly twenty years. Of course he thinks
about you, your majesty, I said. You write to him
often. How can he forget his mother?
Then why doesn't he write to me? Mary asked. Does
he want me to stay here in an English
prison? No, of course not your majesty. But he has
a lot of work, your majesty. He is the
king of Scotland, and he is not the king of
Scotland best, she said. Not before I am dead.
Remember that. No, your majesty. Of course not. But perhaps
people tell him things that are untrue.
You know what people say. Perhaps he thinks you killed
his father. Mary's face went white.
She was very angry, and for a minute I was
afraid. She said, you know that's a lie,
best. It is a lie. I did not kill James's
father. I knew nothing about it. I know that,
your majesty. But perhaps James doesn't know it. He hears
so many lies all the time. He needs
to know the true story. Why don't you write and
tell him? Mary sat down slowly. She looked old
and tired. All right, best. She said, give me a
pen, please. I'm going to write to James and tell
him the true story. You can give it to him
when I'm dead. Dead, your majesty. Don't say that.
You aren't going to die. Her old, tired eyes looked
at me. Yes, I am, best. You know what is
going
to happen? One day soon, a man is going to
bring a letter from Queen Elizabeth, and then her men
are going to kill me. But before I die, I
would like to write to my son, James. I want
to tell him
the story of my life. So give me a pen,
please. I gave her a pen. This is what she
wrote.
Chapter 2 France. Dear James, very soon I am going
to die and meet my God. Before I die,
I want to write the true story of my life
for you. Everything that I write here is true. I
cannot
lie to you or to God. Please believe that, James.
It's important to me. My father died when I was
one week old. So I was the queen of Scots
when I was a baby. At first, I lived with
my mother in
Scotland, and then when I was five, I went to
France. My mother was French, but she stayed in
Scotland, and died there. I went to France to marry
the king of France's son. His name was Francis,
and he was one year younger than me. In 1559,
his father died, so Francis was king.
Then I was queen of France and queen of Scotland
too. I was very happy in France. Francis, my husband,
was like a little brother to me. I think he
loved me, but he was very young, and he was
often ill,
and then in 1560, he died. He was 16 years
old. When he died, I was very unhappy, and my
life was
very different. There was a new king and queen, and
I wasn't important in France anymore,
but I was still queen of Scots. So I came
back to Scotland.
When I arrived in Scotland, I was a young girl
of 18. My mother was dead, and there was no
one
there to meet me. I walked off the ship, and
I slept in a little house near the sea.
Next day, the Scots' lords came from Edinburgh. They were
pleased to see me,
and for a week everyone was happy. People smiled at
me and sang in the streets.
I think everyone liked me. Then, that Sunday, I went
to church.
James, my son, you are a Protestant, and I am
a Catholic.
You are a good man, and you love God, but
your church and my church are enemies.
I was born a Catholic, and I am going to
die a Catholic. I love God, too. I hope you
understand
that. I'm not going to change now. That Sunday, people
shouted angrily in the streets.
Your Majesty, said the Scots' lords. Scotland is a Protestant
country. You can't go to a Catholic
church here. The Scottish people don't like Catholics. I'm sorry,
my lords, I said, but I am your queen.
No one tells me what to do. I don't hate
Protestants, and I'm not going to kill them.
The people can go to their Protestant churches and pray
to God there, but I'm going to pray
with Catholics in my church. People were angry because of
that. A man called John
Knox came to see me. He was a famous Protestant
churchman, but I didn't like him.
He was a big, angry man with black clothes. He
hated the Catholic church and wanted all
Catholics to leave Scotland. To him, the Protestant church was
the only true
church of God. He said, Your Majesty, you're a young
woman like my daughter.
Women can understand difficult things like God or the church.
Find a good, Protestant
husband girl. Let him rule this country for you. I
was very angry with this man, Knox.
I was a queen, but I was only 18. He
didn't talk quietly. He shouted at me. I cried because
of his angry words. I could not understand him. He
talked so much, and he knew so many books.
But I did not go to his church.
He was right about one thing. Perhaps I could rule
Scotland without a man, but I could not
have a child without one. And every queen needs a
son or daughter to come after her.
So I began to look for a husband.
Chapter 3
Darnley and Riccio
At first, I wanted to marry the son of the
king of Spain, Don Carlos.
But he was a Catholic, of course, and my Scots
lords did not like that.
It was difficult for me, James. I wanted to please
myself.
I wanted to please my friends and family in France,
and to please my people too.
And then there was the queen of England.
At first, I wanted very much to be friends with
Elizabeth.
We wrote many letters and talked about a meeting, a
meeting between two sister queens.
Elizabeth wrote to me at this time.
Are two countries need to be friends? You need a
husband.
I need a friend. Why not marry my friend Robert
Dudley, the Earl of Leicester?
He is a tall, strong man. I think he could
be a good husband for you.
I was very angry about this letter.
There were a lot of stories about Elizabeth and Robert
Dudley.
They were good friends. He often danced and sang and
talked with her.
Sometimes, people said, he stayed in her room all night.
Dudley had a wife, but one day, she died very
suddenly.
It was an accident. She fell down the stairs, they
say.
But then, perhaps she was unhappy because of her husband
and Elizabeth.
And she writes to me about a man like this,
I thought.
She wants him to marry me because he is her
friend, her lover, perhaps.
She wants her lover to be king of Scotland.
I found a better man than Dudley, James.
I found Henry Dudley, your father. He was 19 years
old, and I was 23.
He was a tall man with a beautiful face and
big green eyes.
He talked and sang well, and I liked dancing with
him.
He often wore expensive black clothes, and he laughed a
lot when he was with me.
He was very young and friendly, and I felt happy
when I was with him.
I liked him very much, and I thought he loved
me too.
He was an important man too. We were cousins.
His grandfather was king of Scots, and his great grandfather
was Henry VII of England.
In July 1565, I married him. Elizabeth was very angry,
and so were a lot of the
Scots lords. My half-brother, the Earl of Moray, tried
to stop the marriage.
I had to fight him, and he ran south to
England. But I was happy.
Your father and I laughed every day. He was now
Henry, king of Scots.
After one or two weeks, the laughter stopped.
A king has a lot of work, James. You know
that.
He has to read hundreds of letters, talk to people,
and think about a lot of important things.
I did those things every day. But now, I thought,
I had a man to help me.
My Lord Henry, I said, would you like to read
all the letters with me?
You can sit next to me, and you can work
with me every day.
Your father looked unhappy.
I'm not interested in work like that, he said. I
don't understand it.
Of course not, I said. You're a young man, my
love. But I can teach you.
For one or two days, he sat down with me,
and I tried to teach him.
But it was true. He was not interested in the
work, and he did not try to understand it.
You do it, Mary. He said, I'm going out with
my friends. We're going to ride, and drink,
and swim. So, I did all the work. At night,
too, he often went out with his friends in the
town.
They drank a lot, and laughed and sang, and there
were often fights.
But no one said anything, because he was the king,
my husband.
What could people say? They were unhappy, but they were
afraid of him.
Some of them went to England, to the Earl of
Moray.
At this time, I was often very tired, because I
was pregnant.
You, my son James, were alive inside me.
But I did all the work of a queen, and
I needed friends, too.
One of these friends was a young Italian, David Ricchio.
Ricchio was a little man, and he was not tall,
or beautiful, or strong.
But he was a very clever, interesting man. He wrote
many of my letters for me, and helped me.
He sang well, too, and I sometimes sang with him
in the evenings.
I liked him very much, and at first, your father
liked him, too.
But then, Moray's friends began to talk about me and
Ricchio.
David Ricchio is in the Queen's rooms every night.
They said to your father, she laughs, and sings, and
dances with him.
My lord, it is not right. He is not a
Scotsman, and he is not her husband.
He is always with her.
Perhaps they said other things, too.
I don't know.
A lot of Scots lords listened to them.
But I tell you, James, before God, I did nothing
wrong.
David Ricchio was a good man.
He worked hard, and he helped me. So, of course,
I liked him.
Your father did not work. He went out to the
town every night with his friends and drank.
And then, one night, your father came home.
Chapter 4
The Death of David Ricchio
It was a Saturday evening in March 1566.
I was in Edinburgh with some friends.
David Ricchio was there, with six or seven other people.
We were in a small room, but there was a
good dinner on the table, and we were happy.
It was dark outside, but inside it was warm and
friendly.
Suddenly, a door opened behind me.
In the door was Henry Darnley, my husband.
I stood up and smiled.
Good evening, my lord.
I said, please come in.
Would you like something to eat?
No, thank you.
He said, I'm not hungry, but I want to sit
next to you, wife.
Please tell that man to move.
A man got out of the chair next to me,
and Darnley sat beside me.
Then he put his arms around me. I did not
like it.
His face was hot, and his eyes looked unhappy.
But I smiled and said, I'm happy to see you,
my lord.
Are you, Mary?
He laughed.
Are you really?
Yes, of course, my lord.
But then the second door opened, and his friend, Lord
Ruth and stood there.
He had a knife in his hand.
His face was red, and he looked very angry.
At first, no one moved.
Then Ruth and said, your majesty, send David Ricchio out
of this room now.
I want him.
I looked at Ricchio.
He was afraid.
Why?
I said, why do you want him?
He is a bad, wicked man.
Ruth and said, send him out.
No, I said, you want to kill him.
David Ricchio is my friend. He stays here, with me.
He goes out, woman.
Lord Ruth and said, King Henry, hold your wife, please.
I stood up, but darnly held my arms, and I
could not move.
David Ricchio ran behind me, and held my dress.
My friends in the room stood up, too, and moved
towards Ruth and angrily.
But he had a knife in his hand.
Get back, he said, angrily, don't touch me.
Then five men with knives ran into the little room,
and there was a fight.
One man held a knife in my face, and another
man hit David Ricchio behind me.
Then they pulled him out of the room.
Help me, he screamed.
Help me, my queen, please.
They're going to kill me, don't...
I couldn't help him, because darnly had me in his
arms.
But I could hear David Ricchio's screams.
I think he fell down the stairs,
and he screamed for two or three minutes.
Then it was quiet.
What are you doing?
I asked darnly angrily.
Ricchio is a good man.
Why are you doing this?
Darnly laughed.
You are my wife, Mary.
Not David Ricchio's.
He said, so why are you with him every evening?
You never talk to me.
I don't talk to you, because you are never here.
I said, you are always drinking with your friends.
You aren't a king.
You're a stupid boy.
He laughed again.
It was not a nice laugh.
Well, he said, perhaps I am a boy, but that
is better than David Ricchio now.
Do you want to go and see him?
I did see him, five minutes after that.
He was very dead, and there was blood all over
the floor.
Poor David Ricchio.
He sings to God now, not me.
I looked at Henry Darnly, my husband.
He had a stupid smile on his face,
but I think he was afraid of me.
I looked at him a long time.
And the smile went away.
Remember this night, husband.
I said to him, remember it well.
Think about it when you look into my eyes, and
before you go to sleep.
David Ricchio was my friend, and you killed him in
front of me.
I'm never going to forget that, Henry Darnly.
Never.
Chapter 5
My son is born.
Next morning, Darnly came to see me.
He was afraid.
What's the matter, husband?
I said, why are you crying?
Mary, Mary.
He said, I'm sorry, I was wrong.
I helped those men to kill Ricchio, and now the
Earl of Moray is back here with them.
He hates me.
I'm afraid they're going to kill me, and you too.
Think of our child, Mary.
Here inside you.
He took me in his arms again.
I was very angry.
I am sorry, James, that this man was your father.
He was a stupid boy, not a man.
He was tall, and strong, and beautiful, but he could
never think like a man, or a king.
I said, you know these men, Henry.
What do they want?
They want our child, Mary.
They don't want us.
They're going to put you in prison.
They don't want you to be queen.
They want your child to be king or queen.
I don't know what they want to do with me.
Perhaps they want you to be king too, without me,
I said quietly.
Then you can do what they say, like a little
boy.
Perhaps, Mary, they said that yesterday.
But now that Moray's here, I don't know.
I'm afraid.
Please help me.
He began to cry again.
What can we do?
We can run away, I said.
We can leave Edinburgh quickly and quietly, before Ruthbun and
his men stop us.
Be quiet for a minute.
I want to think.
I walked up and down for two or three minutes.
Then I said,
Henry, go back to these men.
Tell them?
No, Mary, please.
I can't.
I'm afraid of them.
Listen to me, Henry, and try to be a man.
Go and tell them I'm ill, because of the child.
Say I'm not angry with them.
Tell them anything, lie to them.
Then tonight, bring some men and horses here, behind the
castle.
He went and did it.
All day, I waited in my rooms and listened.
Then, at one o'clock in the morning,
Darnley and I went quietly down the stairs, behind the
castle.
Some of my friends were there, with horses for us.
Quickly, we rode away into the night.
That was a very bad night.
It was dark and cold.
I was ill, and Darnley was afraid.
Come on.
He said, ride faster, woman.
You're too slow.
But I was pregnant, and it was cold and dark.
We rode for five hours in the rain.
I can't, Henry.
I said, I'm ill.
Think of the baby.
I don't want it to die.
Why not?
He said, we can always make another one.
I'm sorry, but it is true.
Your father said things like that, James.
Then he rode away in front of me, into the
dark.
I rode slowly behind, with my good woman, Bess Co.
In the morning, we arrived at Dunbar Castle.
Darnley slept, and I wrote letters to my friends.
Next day, Lord Bothwell came to help me.
I liked him.
He was a good, strong man.
Soon, I had an army of 8,000 men.
Bothwell and I rode back to Edinburgh with the army.
Lord Ruth then died, and some of his friends ran
away,
but the Earl of Moray stayed.
All that summer, I ruled the country and waited for
the baby.
My husband stayed outside my rooms.
I did not want to see him.
No one did.
Perhaps he drank with his friends, I don't know.
And then, on the 19th of June, in a small
room in Edinburgh Castle,
my baby was born.
It took a long time, but at last you were
in my arms.
James, my son, I asked your father to come in.
My Lord Henry, I said, this is our baby.
Look at him, my Lord.
Take him in your arms.
He is your son.
Isn't he beautiful?
But your father did not love me, James.
Very often, after you were born, he slept with other
women.
I know that because he talked to everyone about it.
I think he wanted people to know.
And, I am sorry, but I do not think he
loved you, James.
When I took you to church and gave you your
name, he did not come.
He wasn't interested.
But because of him, David Riccio was dead.
I could never forget that.
Never.
Chapter 6
Kirkerfield
I had a new man to help me now, the
Earl of Bothewell, a strong clever man.
He was older than me.
He was not a boy like Darnley.
He worked hard, and he could think.
He was a good fighter, and he was not afraid
of other men.
Perhaps you are like him, James, my son.
In January, your father, Darnley, was ill in Glasgow.
I went to see him, and took him back to
Edinburgh.
He was unhappy, and afraid of people.
He saw enemies behind every door.
Poor, stupid boy.
He said he loved me again.
I was angry, but I felt sorry for him too.
He was very ill.
It's not far now, Henry.
I said, you can sleep in the castle.
No, not there.
Please, Mary, he said.
I don't want to go into the castle.
I'm afraid of it.
But where do you want to go?
I asked.
Find me a little house outside the town, and stay
with me there.
He said, we can be happy there.
So I found him a small house called Kirkafield, outside
Edinburgh.
He stayed there in a room upstairs, and sometimes I
slept in a room downstairs.
Darnley was often afraid, and I visited him every day.
Slowly, he got better.
On Sunday the 9th of February, there was a big
wedding in Edinburgh.
After the wedding, Bothwell and I walked out to Kirkafield
to see Darnley and talk to him.
Everyone sang and laughed, and was very happy.
At 10 o'clock, I was tired.
Good night, my lords.
I said, I'm going downstairs to bed.
Lord Bothwell put his hand on my arm.
Your majesty, he said, you can't sleep here now.
Don't you remember?
People are dancing and singing in town tonight.
Everyone wants you to go.
Oh, yes, I forgot.
I said, of course, people want to see me there.
So, good night, Henry.
Sleep well.
Darnley was very unhappy.
Please, Mary, my love, don't go, he said, don't leave
me here.
But I did not love him now.
I remembered the night when Riccio died.
So I smiled and said, good night, Henry.
Be a man now.
Don't be afraid of the dark.
Then I went downstairs with Lord Bothwell.
Outside the house, we met one of Bothwell's men.
He looked afraid, and there was something black on his
face and hands.
Jesus, man, how dirty you are.
I said, don't come near me with those hands.
Normal lady, I said, don't come near me with those
hands.
Of course not.
He said, he looked at Bothwell for a minute and
then ran away quickly.
I laughed, got on my horse and forgot about it.
I tell you before God, James, I did not kill
your father.
It was not me.
I knew nothing about it, nothing.
I sang and danced in town and then went to
bed in Edinburgh Castle.
Then, at two o'clock in the morning, there was
a sudden noise, a very big bang.
Everybody heard it all through the town.
My God, I said, what's that?
Everyone ran out of their rooms.
Lord Bothwell was downstairs.
Don't be afraid, ladies.
He said, my men are outside.
They're going to see what it is.
After an hour, he came to see me.
Please, sit down, my lady, he said.
I have some unhappy news.
Yes, my lord.
What is it?
It's your husband, Lord Darnley.
He is dead.
But how?
How did he die?
Who killed him?
I don't know, my lady.
That bang, that was his house.
Kerkerfield, it's not there anymore.
What?
And Darnley was inside?
Well, no, my lady.
Bothwell said slowly.
My men found him in the garden, not in the
house.
He is wearing only night clothes.
And there is no blood on him.
But he is dead.
I am sorry.
Take me out there.
I want to see him.
Now.
Yes, my lady.
I went out to Kerkerfield in the early morning.
There was no house now.
No walls, no doors, no windows, nothing.
And there in the garden, a long way from the
house,
was that poor, dead boy, my husband.
I did not love him.
But I cried then.
He was your father, James.
And I did not kill him.
I don't know who killed him.
But he had many enemies in Scotland.
I was very afraid.
I too had enemies.
And I often slept there.
Perhaps someone wanted to kill me too.
Chapter 7.
Bothwell.
Soon everyone in Europe heard the news.
The Queen of France and the Queen of England
wrote angry letters to me.
Who killed the king?
They asked.
I was very unhappy at this time, James.
We looked for the killers, but we could not find
them.
Please believe me, James.
The Scots' lords are difficult men.
Some were friends, some were enemies.
But they changed all the time.
Many people in Scotland said,
Bothwell killed Lord Darnley.
I heard them outside the castle and in the town.
But I never believed it.
People in Edinburgh sold horrible stories and pictures of Bothwell,
the same day that Darnley died.
It was too soon.
Perhaps Darnley's killers wrote these stories about Bothwell
before they killed Darnley.
I don't think Lord Bothwell killed your father, James.
He was a good friend to me in difficult times.
He was a good, strong, clever man.
And he worked hard.
I liked that.
A lot of women liked him, I think.
Three times that spring, he asked me to marry him.
He had a wife, and I could not marry again
so soon.
I asked him to wait.
Then, on the 24th of April, I rode out of
Edinburgh to the north.
I had five or six friends with me.
Six miles outside the town, Lord Bothwell met us
with an army.
Why are you here, my Lord?
I said.
He smiled.
Because I want to meet you, Mary, he said.
I want you to come with me to my castle.
He rode next to me, and his man rode between
me and my friends.
I was afraid, and a little excited too.
But my Lord, you can't do this, I said.
I don't want to come with you now.
But I want you, Mary.
He said, your friends can't stop me.
I love you, and I want to marry you.
What's wrong with that?
I said nothing.
What could I say?
I liked him, and he had an army.
I had only six friends.
So, I rode with him to his castle in Dunbar,
and stayed there two weeks.
And then, he was a strong man, and I was
only a woman.
And I did like him, James.
I liked him very much.
After two weeks in Dunbar,
Bothwell and I rode back to Edinburgh.
His wife did not want him, and was happy to
divorce him.
So, on the 15th of May, 1567,
I married him.
He was a good man, James.
A much better man than your father.
I needed a strong man to help me rule the
country.
But, I was wrong.
I understand that now.
All the Scots lords were afraid of Bothwell,
and many of them were his enemies.
They had an army, and on the 15th of June,
Bothwell and I rode out to fight them.
We met them at Carbury Hill.
It was a hot day, and the two big armies
stood,
and looked, and waited.
Their army had a big flag,
with a picture of your poor, dead father,
darnly on it.
Under the picture, there were the words,
find my killers, oh God.
Come on, my lord, I said to Bothwell,
our army is better than theirs.
Let's fight them.
Bothwell rode up and down, and talked to his men.
But they didn't want to fight.
They talked, and looked at the flag, and waited.
Then, some of them walked home.
At five o'clock that evening,
Lord Keir Khaldi rode from his army to talk to
us.
He said to me, my lady,
leave your husband and come with us.
We don't want men to die.
And so, because our men didn't want to fight,
I went with him.
It was a very bad day for me.
They took me back to Edinburgh,
and people in the streets screamed at me.
Kill the woman, she sleeps with her husband's killer.
We want James to be king, kill her now.
I was unhappy and afraid, and I was pregnant again.
They took me to Lachlevan Castle,
and put me in a room like a prison.
There, I did not eat for two weeks.
And Bothwell's children, there were two babies,
were born dead.
I nearly died, too.
I was so angry and tired and ill.
Then, one day after the babies died,
Lord Lindsey gave me a letter.
It said, I, Mary Queen of Scots,
give the kingdom of Scotland to my son, James.
From today, James is the new king of Scots.
But, because he is a child, the Earl of Moray,
my half-brother, can rule the country for him.
Because I was afraid and tired and ill,
I wrote my name on the letter, Mary.
But, it is not important, James.
It doesn't change anything.
I am Queen of Scots, not you.
That letter changes nothing.
Bothwell went over the sea and died in a prison
in Denmark.
I was a prisoner in Lachleven for a year.
A lot of people in Europe were angry about that.
Queen Elizabeth wrote to the Earl of Moray,
you cannot keep a queen in prison, she said.
It is very wrong.
I was pleased about that, but Moray didn't listen.
Lord Douglas lived in the castle, and his young son,
William, liked me.
One day, there was a wedding in the castle.
People sang and danced and drank.
William Douglas gave me some old women's clothes.
I put the clothes on and walked quietly out of
the castle with him.
He shut the castle door behind us to keep his
father's friends in.
Then, we got on some horses and rode away through
the night.
All my friends came back to me.
Soon, I had a big army.
Mary is our queen again, people said.
Give her back her son.
You were in Earl Moray's castle, James, so I came
to fight him.
I rode with my army to Langside, near Glasgow, and
there.
There, James.
There, my son, I lost the fight.
I am so sorry.
I had many good, strong men in my army, but
Earl Moray's men were stronger.
Many of my men died, and some ran away.
After the fight, I ran away too.
I did not want to go to prison again, so
I rode south to England.
Queen Elizabeth wants to help me.
I thought, she understands, she wrote to Moray, and she
is a queen, like me.
I can come back to Scotland with her army, kill
Moray, and find my baby son, James.
I am in England, but I am free. I can
try again.
I was wrong about that too. Very wrong.
Chapter 8, England.
Elizabeth didn't give me her army. She put me in
prison.
You know this, James. It is the story of your
life.
Not mine.
I was 25 years old when I came to England,
and I am 45 now.
20 years in English prisons.
Moray told lies about me.
Mary and Bothwell killed Darnley, he said.
Mary slept with Riccio and Bothwell, and killed her husband.
But it's not true. They're all lies, James. Wicked lies.
They only said these things, because I am a woman,
and a Catholic.
And they don't want a Catholic queen in Scotland. They
want a Protestant king.
A king like you, James. Why, James, my son, don't
you help me?
Why are you friendly with Elizabeth, my enemy?
You don't want me back in Scotland, do you?
You believe these lies, don't you?
You talk to Moray and his friends every day.
But they lied about me, James.
Moray and his friends killed Riccio. They killed your father
too.
They stole my husband, Bothwell. Stole my son. Stole my
son's love.
I'm sorry, James. Forgive me. Sometimes I get very angry.
It is difficult not to be angry when you are
imprisoned for 20 years.
Elizabeth didn't know what to do. Sometimes she believed Moray.
Sometimes she didn't. She was afraid to kill me, because
I was a queen.
She was afraid to let me go free, because I
have friends in England.
The English Catholics want me to be queen of England,
not her.
And she is a woman with no husband and no
son, so she hates me too.
Sometimes the English Catholics write to me and ask me
for help.
And sometimes I write to them. Sometimes Elizabeth's men find
these letters.
The English Protestants want to kill me, because of these
letters.
You are a wicked woman, they say. You killed your
husband, Darnley,
and now you want to kill our queen, Elizabeth. You're
going to die.
I did not kill my husband, I said. And when
I came to England, I did not want to kill
your queen.
I asked her for help. I wanted to go back
to Scotland.
But my Lord's, she put me in prison for 20
years.
20 years, my Lord's, I want to be free. Don't
you understand that?
When men write to me and try to help me,
then yes, sometimes I write back.
Why not? Is that wicked? Do you think?
They didn't listen. Of course not. They want to kill
me.
And so they wrote to Queen Elizabeth. And now I
sit here in Fotheringay Castle
and wait for her to answer.
I do not want to die James my son, but
I do not want to live all my life in
an English prison.
I am old and tired of life.
Think well of me, James, my son, and...
I am old and tired of life in an English
prison for 20 years.
Chapter 9 A Death
Queen Mary stopped writing then, yesterday afternoon, the 7th of
February, 1587.
We heard a horse outside our window. Mary looked out.
There was a man there on the road from London.
He had a letter from the Queen of England.
In the evening, an Englishman, Lord Shrosbury came to see
Mary.
I am sorry, my lady, he said, but I have
a letter from my Queen.
You are going to die tomorrow.
Mary did not move.
When she asked quietly, at half past 8 in the
morning, he said, I am very sorry, my lady.
He went away.
We did not sleep much that night. We talked and
prayed to God,
and she gave me her letter to her son, James.
Give it to him, Bess, please.
She said, and tell him how I died.
Yes, my lady, I said.
And so now I am going to tell you, King
James, this is how your mother died.
At six o'clock, she got up, prayed and dressed.
She put on a red petticoat first, then a black
dress and a white veil over the dress.
The veil came from her head to her feet. She
could see out through it, but we could not see
her face.
She looked like a woman on her wedding day.
When the English men came, we went downstairs with her.
Her little dog walked beside her under the veil, but
the English men did not see that.
Six of us went into a big room with her.
A hundred people stood and watched.
A Protestant churchman came to talk to her.
My lady, he said, pray with me.
No, she said, thank you, but no, I was born
a Catholic, and I'm going to die a Catholic.
I think God understands that.
She prayed for five minutes and then stood up.
The executioner came towards her.
He was a big, strong man with an axe and
something black over his face.
I am sorry, my lady. He said, I don't hate
you, but this is my work. Please forgive me.
Of course, I forgive you. Mary said, I am old
and tired, and you're going to open my
prison doors for me. I am going to see God.
Do your work well.
Then she looked at me and her friends.
Don't cry for me, ladies, she said. Please don't cry
now.
She could not walk to the block, so the executioner
helped her.
He took off her white veil and then he took
off her black dress and put it on the floor.
She stood there in her red petticoat with a smile
on her face.
Then the executioner put something over her eyes. Very slowly,
Mary put her head on the block.
The Lord, my God, is my one true friend. She
said, I give my life, oh God, into your hands.
Then the executioner lifted his axe once, twice, oh God,
three times, and her head,
her poor, poor head fell on the floor. It was
very quiet in the room after that.
It is a little thing ahead, a very little thing,
but there was so much blood.
Blood on her red petticoat, blood on her black dress
and her white veil, blood on the executioner's
face. We all looked and said nothing.
The executioner put down his axe and stood quietly.
And then Mary's little dog came out from under her
bloody dress and veil and walked slowly,
unhappily through the blood towards her head.
My Lord, the story of your poor mother's life finishes
here.
We, her friends, cry for her, but that is how
your mother died.
She died like a queen, a good lady, and a
famous queen.
Mary, Queen of Scots.